aregister, areg

Show the transactions and running historical balance in an account, with
each line item representing one transaction.

_FLAGS

aregister shows the transactions affecting a particular account and its
subaccounts, with each line item representing a whole transaction - as
in bank statements, hledger-ui, hledger-web and other accounting apps.

Note this is unlike the register command, which shows individual
postings and does not always show a single account or a historical
balance.

A reminder, "historical" balances include any balance from transactions
before the report start date, so (if opening balances are recorded
correctly) aregister will show the real-world balances of an account, as
you would see in a bank statement.

As a quick rule of thumb, use aregister for reconciling real-world
asset/liability accounts and register for reviewing detailed
revenues/expenses.

aregister shows the register for just one account (and its subaccounts).
This account must be specified as the first argument. You can write
either the full account name, or a case-insensitive regular expression
which will select the alphabetically first matched account. (Eg if you
have assets:aaa:checking and assets:bbb:checking accounts,
hledger areg checking would select assets:aaa:checking.)

Any additional arguments form a query which will filter the transactions
shown.

Each aregister line item shows:

-   the transaction's date (or the relevant posting's date if different,
    see below)
-   the names of all the other account(s) involved in this transaction
    (probably abbreviated)
-   the total change to this account's balance from this transaction
-   the account's historical running balance after this transaction.

Transactions making a net change of zero are not shown by default; add
the -E/--empty flag to show them.

aregister ignores a depth limit, so its final total will always match a
balance report with similar arguments.

This command also supports the output destination and output format
options The output formats supported are txt, csv, and json.

aregister and custom posting dates

Transactions whose date is outside the report period can still be shown,
if they have a posting to this account dated inside the report period.
(And in this case it's the posting date that is shown.) This ensures
that aregister can show an accurate historical running balance, matching
the one shown by register -H with the same arguments.

To filter strictly by transaction date instead, add the --txn-dates
flag. If you use this flag and some of your postings have custom dates,
it's probably best to assume the running balance is wrong.

Examples:

Show all transactions and historical running balance in the first
account whose name contains "checking":

$ hledger areg checking

Show transactions and historical running balance in all asset accounts
during july:

$ hledger areg assets date:jul
