get

Fetch data for the journal: first transactions, then market prices, by
running helper scripts in journal-relative data/ and prices/ directories.

Flags:
     --dry-run              just print the commands that would be run

This command runs two phases in order.

Phase 1: data

1. Creates a data/ directory next to the main journal file, if it does
   not exist.
2. If a data/getdata script exists, runs it with data/ as its working
   directory, so it can save downloaded files (CSV/OFX/etc.) there. The
   script's stdout is forwarded to hledger's stdout, and its stderr to
   hledger's stderr.
3. If data/getdata is not present, this phase is skipped with a notice
   on stderr.

Phase 2: prices

1. Creates a prices/ directory next to the main journal file, if it does
   not exist.
2. If a prices/getprices script exists, hledger first guesses the
   journal's base currency (the commodity most used as the target in P
   price directives; or if there are no P directives, the commodity most
   used in postings; or if there are no postings, "USD"). Then for each
   other commodity in the journal, it fetches daily market prices in the
   base currency, from that commodity's earliest transaction until
   today, by running prices/getprices BASECUR COMM START END. Each
   commodity's prices are merged into prices/<COMM>.prices.
3. If prices/getprices is not present, this phase is skipped with a
   notice on stderr.

Commands being run, and files being updated, are logged to stderr. With
--dry-run, you can preview the commands without running them.

Merging new prices

Complete historical price data can be hard to get, so the prices phase
is careful to preserve older prices. If prices files already exist, the
newly fetched prices will be merged as follows:

- Prices files will be updated only if they contain nothing but P
  directives (or blank lines).
- New prices for dates already seen are discarded. (So if you want to
  replace old prices, you must delete them before running get.)
- If no new prices remain to be added, the prices file is left as-is.
- Otherwise, the old prices plus the new prices are saved to the file,
  ordered by: date, from commodity, to commodity.

The getdata helper

The get command's data phase runs a getdata helper script. You can make
your own getdata script (a shell script, executable, or anything PATH
can run). A typical script downloads bank/brokerage statements as CSV or
OFX files into the working directory, and optionally converts them to
journal format.

A sample getdata script may be available in the hledger repo's bin
directory. Place a (possibly customised) copy in a data/ directory next
to your journal file.

The getprices helper

The get command's prices phase runs a getprices helper script once per
commodity. This allows customisation and avoids hardcoding too much into
hledger.

A sample getprices script is available in the hledger repo's bin
directory. Place a (possibly customised) copy in a prices/ directory
next to your journal file. It uses the third party pricehist tool, which
you can install with eg uv tool install pricehist. You might also want
to set up price provider API keys in your environment. Providers may
limit the commodity pairs, history, or number of requests unless you
have a paid API key.

Or, you can make your own getprices script. It should accept 3-4
arguments:

- ISO code for base currency
- ISO code for commodity to be priced
- ISO start date
- optional inclusive ISO end date (default: today)
