import

Import new transactions from one or more data files to the main journal.

Flags:
     --catchup              just mark all transactions as already imported
     --dry-run              just show the transactions to be imported

This command detects new transactions in one or more data files
specified as arguments, and appends them to the main journal.

You can import from any input file format hledger supports, but
CSV/SSV/TSV files, downloaded from financial institutions, are the most
common import source.

The import destination is the default journal file, or another specified
in the usual way with $LEDGER_FILE or -f/--file. It should be in journal
format.

Examples:

$ hledger import bank1-checking.csv bank1-savings.csv

$ hledger import *.csv

Import preview

It's useful to preview the import by running first with --dry-run, to
sanity check the range of dates being imported, and to check the effect
of your conversion rules if converting from CSV. Eg:

$ hledger import bank.csv --dry-run

The dry run output is valid journal format, so hledger can re-parse it.
If the output is large, you could show just the uncategorised
transactions like so:

$ hledger import --dry-run bank.csv | hledger -f- -I print unknown

You could also run this repeatedly to see the effect of edits to your
conversion rules:

$ watchexec -- 'hledger import --dry-run bank.csv | hledger -f- -I print unknown'

Once the conversion and dates look good enough to import to your
journal, perhaps with some manual fixups to follow, you would do the
actual import:

$ hledger import bank.csv

Overlap detection

Reading CSV files is built in to hledger, and not specific to import; so
you could also import by doing hledger -f bank.csv print >>$LEDGER_FILE.

But import is easier and provides some advantages. The main one is that
it avoids re-importing transactions it has seen on previous runs. This
means you don't have to worry about overlapping data in successive
downloads of your bank CSV; just download and import as often as you
like, and only the new transactions will be imported each time.

We don't call this "deduplication", as it's generally not possible to
reliably detect duplicates in bank CSV. Instead, import remembers the
latest date processed previously in each CSV file (saving it in a hidden
file), and skips any records prior to that date. This works well for
most real-world CSV, where:

1.  the data file name is stable (does not change) across imports
2.  the item dates are stable across imports
3.  the order of same-date items is stable across imports
4.  the newest items have the newest dates

(Occasional violations of 2-4 are often harmless; you can reduce the
chance of disruption by downloading and importing more often.)

Overlap detection is automatic, and shouldn't require much attention
from you, except perhaps at first import (see below). But here's how it
works:

- For each FILE being imported from:

  1.  hledger reads a file named .latest.FILE file in the same
      directory, if any. This file contains the latest record date
      previously imported from FILE, in YYYY-MM-DD format. If multiple
      records with that date were imported, the date is repeated on N
      lines.

  2.  hledger reads records from FILE. If a latest date was found in
      step 1, any records before that date, and the first N records on
      that date, are skipped.

- After a successful import from all FILEs, without error and without
  --dry-run, hledger updates each FILE's .latest.FILE for next time.

If this goes wrong, it's relatively easy to repair:

- You'll notice it before import when you preview with import --dry-run.
- Or after import when you try to reconcile your hledger account
  balances with your bank.
- hledger print -f FILE.csv will show all recently downloaded
  transactions. Compare these with your journal. Copy/paste if needed.
- Update your conversion rules and print again, if needed.
- You can manually update or remove the .latest file, or use
  import --catchup FILE.
- Download and import more often, eg twice a week, at least while you
  are learning. It's easier to review and troubleshoot when there are
  fewer transactions.

First import

The first time you import from a file, when no corresponding .latest
file has been created yet, all of the records will be imported.

But perhaps you have been entering the data manually, so you know that
all of these transactions are already recorded in the journal. In this
case you can run hledger import --catchup once. This will create a
.latest file containing the latest CSV record date, so that none of
those records will be re-imported.

Or, if you know that some but not all of the transactions are in the
journal, you can create the .latest file yourself. Eg, let's say you
previously recorded foobank transactions up to 2024-10-31 in the
journal. Then in the directory where you'll be saving foobank.csv, you
would create a .latest.foobank.csv file containing

2024-10-31

Or if you had three foobank transactions recorded with that date, you
would repeat the date that many times:

2024-10-31
2024-10-31
2024-10-31

Then hledger import foobank.csv [--dry-run] will import only the newer
records.

Importing balance assignments

Journal entries added by import will have all posting amounts made
explicit (like print -x).

This means that any balance assignments in the imported entries would
need to be evaluated. But this generally isn't possible, as the main
file's account balances are not visible during import. So try to avoid
generating balance assignments with your CSV rules, or importing from a
journal that contains balance assignments. (Balance assignments are best
avoided anyway.)

But if you must use them, eg because your CSV includes only balances:
you can import with print, which leaves implicit amounts implicit.
(print can also do overlap detection like import, with the --new flag):

$ hledger print --new -f bank.csv >> $LEDGER_FILE

(If you think import should preserve implicit balances, please test that
and send a pull request.)

Import and commodity styles

Amounts in entries added by import will be formatted according to the
journal's canonical commodity styles, as declared by commodity
directives or inferred from the journal's amounts.

Related: CSV > Amount decimal places.

Import special cases

If you have a download whose file name varies, you could rename it to a
fixed name after each download. Or you could use a CSV source rule with
a suitable glob pattern, and import from the .rules file instead of the
data file.

Here's a situation where you would need to run import with care: say you
download bank.csv, but forget to import it or delete it. And next month
you download it again. This time your web browser may save it as
bank (2).csv. So now each of these may have data not included in the
other. And a source rule with a glob pattern would match only the most
recent file. So in this case you should import from each one in turn, in
the correct order, taking care to use the same filename each time:

$ hledger import bank.csv
$ mv 'bank (2).csv' bank.csv
$ hledger import bank.csv

Here are two kinds of "deduplication" which import does not handle (and
generally should not, since these can happen legitimately in financial
data):

- Two or more of the new CSV records are identical, and generate
  identical new journal entries.
- A new CSV record generates a journal entry identical to one(s) already
  in the journal.
