repl

Start an interactive prompt for running hledger commands. Input files
are reloaded only when they change, so commands run faster.

Flags:
     --no-watch             disable automatic reloading of changed input
                            files, config aliases and addon commands

This command is experimental and could change in the future.

hledger repl starts a read-eval-print loop (REPL) where you can enter
commands interactively. As with the run command, each input file (or
each input file/input options combination) is parsed just once, so
commands will run more quickly than if you ran them individually at the
command line.

The input file(s) specified for the repl command will be used throughout
the session; but you can override this temporarily by specifying new -f
options for a command.

Before running a command, any input files which have changed on disk are
automatically reloaded. Also command aliases are reloaded if the config
file has changed, and addon commands are re-detected if PATH's contents
have changed. The --no-watch flag disables all of this reloading, so as
to work with a stable snapshot of the data, or to avoid file/directory
polling on a slow network drive.

Any other general flags given to repl - input, reporting, or display
flags such as -I, --strict, --alias, -b/-e, --depth, --cost, --value,
--color - are also applied to every command you run. A command can still
override them by specifying its own flags.

The command syntax is the same as with run:

- enter one hledger command at a time, without the usual hledger first
  word
- empty lines and comment text from # to end of line are ignored
- enclose arguments in quotes if they contain spaces.

Use help or help commands to list commands. Addons in PATH and command
aliases defined in a config file can also be used. Generally repl should
feel much like using hledger at the command line. But repl requires full
command names or official abbreviations (it does not recognise ad hoc
abbreviations).

To run a single shell command, type ! SHELLCMD (eg ! ls or
! git status).

While it is running, the REPL remembers your command history, and you
can navigate in the usual ways:

- Keypad or Emacs navigation keys to edit the current command line
- UP/DOWN or control-P/control-N to step back/forward through history
- control-R to search for a past command
- TAB to complete file paths.

You can type control-C to cancel a long-running command (but only once;
typing it a second time will exit the REPL).

In most shells you can type control-Z to temporarily exit to the shell
(and then fg to return to the REPL).

To exit the REPL, use control-D or q or quit or exit.

Examples

Start the REPL and enter some commands:

$ hledger repl 
hledger 1.52
Enter hledger commands. To exit, enter 'quit' or 'exit', or send EOF / control-d.
2025> stats
Main file           : .../2025.journal
...
2025> stats -f 2024/2024.journal 
Main file           : .../2024.journal
...
2025> stats
Main file           : .../2025.journal
...

or:

$ hledger repl -f some.journal
hledger 1.52
Enter hledger commands. To exit, enter 'quit' or 'exit', or send EOF / control-d.
some> bs
...
some> print -b 'last week'
...
some> bs -f other.journal
...
