roi

Shows the money-weighted (IRR) and time-weighted (TWR) rate of return on
your investments.

Flags:
     --cashflow                 show all amounts that were used to compute
                                returns
     --investment=QUERY         query to select your investment transactions
     --profit-loss=QUERY --pnl  query to select profit-and-loss or
                                appreciation/valuation transactions

At a minimum, you need to supply a query (which could be just an account
name) to select your investment(s) with --inv, and another query to
identify your profit and loss transactions with --pnl.

If your investment's value changes are captured solely through price
directives (rather than manual P&L journal entries), or if you do not
need TWR, --pnl can be an empty query (--pnl "" or --pnl STR where STR
does not match any of your accounts).

This command will compute and display the internal rate of return (IRR,
also known as money-weighted rate of return) and time-weighted rate of
return (TWR) for your investments for the time period requested. IRR is
always annualized due to the way it is computed, but TWR is reported
both as a rate over the chosen reporting period and as an annual rate.

Price directives will be taken into account if you supply appropriate
--cost or --value flags (see VALUATION).

Note, in some cases this report can fail, for these reasons:

-   Error (NotBracketed): No solution for Internal Rate of Return (IRR).
    Possible causes: IRR is huge (>1000000%), balance of investment
    becomes negative at some point in time.
-   Error (SearchFailed): Failed to find solution for Internal Rate of
    Return (IRR). Either search does not converge to a solution, or
    converges too slowly.
-   Error (NotBracketed): Cannot compute window IRR. Possible cause:
    investment balance becomes negative within that window.
-   Error (SearchFailed): Window IRR search did not converge.

Examples:

-   Using roi to compute total return of investment in stocks:
    https://github.com/simonmichael/hledger/blob/main/examples/investing/roi-unrealised.ledger

-   Cookbook > Return on Investment: https://hledger.org/roi.html

Spaces and special characters in --inv and --pnl

Note that --inv and --pnl's argument is a query, and queries could have
several space-separated terms (see QUERIES).

To indicate that all search terms form single command-line argument, you
will need to put them in quotes (see Special characters):

$ hledger roi --inv 'term1 term2 term3 ...'

If any query terms contain spaces themselves, you will need an extra
level of nested quoting, eg:

$ hledger roi --inv="'Assets:Test 1'" --pnl="'Equity:Unrealized Profit and Loss'"

Semantics of --inv and --pnl

Query supplied to --inv has to match all transactions that are related
to your investment. Transactions not matching --inv will be ignored.

In these transactions, ROI will consider postings that match --inv to be
"investment postings" and other postings (not matching --inv) will be
sorted into two categories: "cash flow" and "profit and loss", as ROI
needs to know which part of the investment value is your contributions
and which is due to the return on investment.

-   "Cash flow" is depositing or withdrawing money, buying or selling
    assets, or otherwise converting between your investment commodity
    and any other commodity. Example:

    2019-01-01 Investing in Snake Oil
      assets:cash          -$100
      investment:snake oil

    2020-01-01 Selling my Snake Oil
      assets:cash           $10
      investment:snake oil  = 0

-   "Profit and loss" is change in the value of your investment:

    2019-06-01 Snake Oil falls in value
      investment:snake oil  = $57
      equity:unrealized profit or loss

All non-investment postings are assumed to be "cash flow", unless they
match --pnl query. Changes in value of your investment due to "profit
and loss" postings will be considered as part of your investment return.

Example: if you use --inv snake --pnl equity:unrealized, then postings
in the example below would be classifed as:

2019-01-01 Snake Oil #1
  assets:cash          -$100   ; cash flow posting
  investment:snake oil         ; investment posting

2019-03-01 Snake Oil #2
  equity:unrealized pnl  -$100 ; profit and loss posting
  snake oil                    ; investment posting

2019-07-01 Snake Oil #3
  equity:unrealized pnl        ; profit and loss posting
  cash          -$100          ; cash flow posting
  snake oil     $50            ; investment posting

IRR and TWR explained

"ROI" stands for "return on investment". Traditionally this was computed
as a difference between current value of investment and its initial
value, expressed in percentage of the initial value.

However, this approach is only practical in simple cases, where the
investment receives no in-flows or out-flows of money and the rate of
growth is fixed over time. For more complex scenarios you need different
ways to compute rate of return, and this command implements two of them:
IRR and TWR.

Internal rate of return (IRR), also called money-weighted rate of
return, answers the question: what single constant annual interest rate,
applied to your actual sequence of deposits and withdrawals, would
produce exactly the ending balance you have?

IRR is inherently personal. If you deposited a large sum right before a
bad period, your IRR is dragged down - not because the investment was
poorly managed, but because your timing was bad. Conversely, investing
heavily just before a rally makes your IRR look great. This is what
makes IRR "money-weighted": periods when more of your money is at stake
contribute more to the result.

In technical terms, IRR uses the same approach as computation of net
present value, and tries to find a discount rate that makes the net
present value of all the cash flows of your investment add up to zero.
The implementation in hledger produces results that match the =XIRR
formula in Excel.

Time-weighted rate of return (TWR) strips out the effect of your deposit
and withdrawal timing, measuring the investment's own performance rather
than your experience of it.

hledger computes TWR using the BAI (Bank Administration Institute)
Linked IRR method. The reporting period is divided into windows at each
date where the portfolio has a known, externally-established valuation -
these are dates of price directives or of manual balance updates
recorded via --pnl transactions. Within each window, if no cash flows
occurred, the return is simply the ratio of ending to starting value. If
cash flows occurred within a window, the window's return is found by
solving for the rate that reconciles the starting value, the ending
value, and the timing of those flows. All window returns are then
multiplied together (geometrically chained) to give the TWR for the full
period.

The accuracy of TWR depends on how many valuation dates you have
recorded. More valuation dates mean finer windows and more precise
results.

In short: TWR tells you how good the investment was; IRR tells you how
good your experience of the investment was.

When each matters

Use IRR when you want to know your actual personal return - what you
earned on your money, accounting for when you chose to move it. It is
the right measure when evaluating your own deposit and withdrawal timing
decisions.

Use TWR when you want to evaluate the investment vehicle itself,
independent of your deposit timing. It is the right measure when
comparing two funds or strategies, or when asking whether you would have
been better off elsewhere. TWR is the standard that professional
investment managers use to report fund performance, precisely because it
removes the distortion caused by investor cash flows.

References:

-   Explanation of rate of return
-   Explanation of IRR
-   Explanation of TWR
-   IRR vs TWR
-   Examples of computing IRR and TWR and discussion of the limitations
    of both metrics
