run

Runs a sequence of hledger commands on the same input file(s), either
interactively or as a script.

This command is EXPERIMENTAL and syntax could change in the future.

Flags:
no command-specific flags

The commands will run more quickly than if run individually, because the
input files would be parsed only once.

"run" has three ways of invocation: - when invoked without arguments, it
start a read-eval-print loop (REPL) where you can enter commands
interactively. To exit REPL, use "exit" or "quit", or send EOF.

-   when file names are given to "run", it will read commands from these
    files, in order.

-   lastly, commands could be specified directly on the command line.
    All commands (including the very first one) should be preceded by
    argument "--"

Syntax of the commands (either in the file, or in REPL) is intentionally
simple: - each line is a single hledger command - lines that can't be
interpreted as hledger commands are printed out as-is - empty lines are
skipped - everything after # is considered to be a comment and will be
ignored, and will not be printed out - echo <text> will print out text,
even if it could be recognized as a hledger command

You can use single quotes or double quotes to quote aguments that need
quoting.

You can use #!/usr/bin/env hledger run in the first line of the file to
make it a runnable script. If this complains about "binary hledger run
not found", use /usr/bin/env -S hledger run.

Caveats:

-   If you meant to provide file name as an argument, but made a mistake
    and a gave file name that does not exist, "run" will attempt to
    interpret it as a command.

-   Numeric flags like -3 do not work, use long form --depth 3

-   You can pass -f to the run itself, and also to any commands given
    after it (or in the command file, or via REPL). When specific
    command does not have -f in its flags, it will use the journal(s)
    specified in the arguments of run. If command does have -f flag,
    this journal would be read and its contents would be cache, so if
    several commands specify the same -f flag, they will read the
    journal only once.

Examples:

To start the REPL:

hledger run

To provide commands on the command line, separate them with --:

hledger run -f some.journal -- balance assets --depth 2 -- balance liabilities -f /some/other.journal --depth 3 --transpose

To provide commands in the file, as a runnable scripts:

#!/usr/bin/env -S hledger run
echo "List of accounts"
accounts

echo "Assets"
balance assets --depth 2

echo "Liabilities"
balance liabilities -f /some/other.journal --depth 3 --transpose
